GETTING STARTED WITH JEDIT (starting.txt, last modified 10 Dec 1998)

Contents
--------
1. Starting jEdit
2. Opening Files
3. Saving Files
4. Editing Files

1. Starting jEdit
-----------------
Usually, jEdit is started to edit one or more files with this command:

	jedit <filename 1> <filename 2>...

jEdit can also be started with no arguments:

	jedit

In that case, it will open a new `Untitled' file.

A number of options can be given to jEdit:

	-version: Print jEdit version and exit
	-usage: Print command line usage
	-nousrprops: Don't load user properties
	-noserver: Don't start server
	-portfile=<file>: Use <file> to store server port instead of default
	-readonly: Open files read only

To open a file whose name starts with a dash (-), you must place the --
argument before it in the command line to stop it from being 
interpreted as an option:

	jedit -- -file-whose-name-starts-with-dash

The -- indicates the end of options. No more options after it are 
interpreted.

NOTE: To save on memory usage, jEdit checks if another instance of it 
is already running when it starts. If it is, is tells that instance to 
open the specified files, and exits. If you don't like this, add the 
-noserver switch to the jEdit command line.

2. Opening Files
----------------
Within jEdit, files can be opened for editing in one of three ways:

- With the `File->Open File' command, which shows a file selection 
  dialog.
- With the `File->Open URL' command, which lets you type in a path name 
  or URL.
- With the `File->New File' command, which creates a blank, untitled 
  file.

A new buffer is created for each file, and the file's contents are 
loaded into it. The file remains unchanged on disk until you save it.

3. Saving Files
---------------
Files can be saved back to disk in one of three ways:

- With the `File->Save' command, which saves the file immediately.
- With the `File->Save As' command, which shows a file selection dialog,
  allowing a different name for the file to be chosen.
- With the `File->Save To URL' command, which prompts for a path name or
  URL to save the file to.

The autosave feature protects against computer crashes. It saves open 
files at fixed intervals, 30 seconds by default. When a file is 
autosaved, its name is enclosed in `#' characters - for example, if you 
were editing the file `HelloWorld.java', it would be autosaved to 
`#HelloWorld.java#'. If jEdit crashes during an editing session, you 
can open the autosave file, and if it contains important information, 
overwrite the original file with it.

The backup feature protects against the user's mistakes. When you save 
a file, a tilde (`~') is added to the name of the original version 
before the new version is saved - for example, if you made some changes 
to `HelloWorld.java' and saved them, the original version, before the 
changes, would be called `HelloWorld.java~'. If you make some changes 
that you didn't like, you can revert to the last saved version by 
opening the backup file and overwriting the new version with it.

4. Editing Files
----------------
Files are edited inside views. Each view can only edit one file at 
once, but there can be any number of views open at once. More than one 
view can edit the same file - changes made in one view automatically 
appear in the others.

The `File->New View' command creates a new view, set to the edit the 
same file as the current one.

The `File->Close View' command closes the current view and exits jEdit 
if there aren't any left.

The Buffers menu can be used to select which file the current view 
should be editing.

Each view has a status bar. A sample status bar looks like this:

(--:**) rc.multi (Text, Line 124/124 100%)
 ^ ^ ^        ^    ^          ^   ^   ^
 | | |        |    |          |   |   |
 | | |        |    |          |   |   The caret position, as a percentage
 | | |        |    |          |   |
 | | |        |    |          |   The total number of lines in the file
 | | |        |    |          |
 | | |        |    |          The line number the caret is on
 | | |        |    |
 | | |        |    The current edit mode
 | | |        |
 | | |        The full pathname of the file
 | | |
 | | (**) if the has changed since last save, (--) if it hasn't
 | |
 | (/) if the file is read only, (:) if it's writeable
 |
(**) if the file is untitled, (--) if it's not

If you've ever used an editor such as nedit on Unix, Notepad on Windows
or SimpleText on the Mac you'll feel right at home in jEdit. jEdit 
works in much the same way as the above editors. The menu item 
shortcuts are similar as well.

-- Slava Pestov
<sp@gjt.org>
